OQ

Control: Low risk because ITQ fishery, use cage tags, etc.; any landings overages would be result of enforcement issues. 
Interactions: no documented interactions with proteced resources; fishery is generally targeted. 
Reg stability: Minor changes to regulations in recent years; specification virtually unchanged for decade. 
Discards: allocated minimal coverage under SBRM as a result of discard being low percent of total catch; however, cooccurence of surfclams and quahogs raised as major issue* (2022 implementation plan action)  
Allocation: single allocation applied to entire EEZ, plus small allocation for ME fishery. Flexibility to catch and land virtually anywhere. 

* Because very high density surfclam beds have been fished down (as indicated by consistently declining surfclam cpue's), fishermen are fishing in and encountering more beds that have mixes of both surfclams and ocean quahogs. Bceause fishing trips cannot be mixed species (must be quahog only, surfclam only) and cages cannot be mixed (tagged with surfclam or quahog ITQ), this has resulted in increased discarding of one of the species either on board the vessel, at the dealer (as dealers process one species at a time), or the potential for some cages to contain a mix,  which is not compliant with regulations. It has also created "catch accounting" issues as the non-targets in cages or at processing facilities are not being reported - cages are assumed to contain only the target species as tagged when they are not. As such the Council's has initiated an Amendment in its 2022 Implementation Plan. This was scored as a 3, because while these discard events may be small to moderate, it is clearly occurring frequently enought that this is a concern for the fishing industry - they have expressed concerns from an enforcement perspective. Industry has indicated this mixing is extensive in areas, and expected to worsen over time. 

Surfclam

Control: Low risk because ITQ fishery, use cage tags, etc.; any landings overages would be result of enforcement issues. 
Interactions: no documented interactions with proteced resources; fishery is generally targeted. 
Reg stability: Minor changes to regulations in recent years; specifications virtually unchanged for decade. 
Discards: allocated minimal coverage under SBRM as a result of discard being low percent of total catch; however, commigling of surfclams and quahogs raised as major issue* (2022 implementation plan action). 
Allocation: single allocation applied to entire EEZ. Flexibility to catch and land virtually anywhere. 

Fluke R

Control: recreational catch has been below the recreational ACL in 4 of the last 5 years (a 9% overage in 2020 and underages from 6-28% in other years). 
Interactions: limited interaction with MMPA species, no AMs triggered and no implication for recreational fishery due to AM from non-MAFMC species. 
OSW 1: Declining overlap during 14-18 and 19-23 time periods and similar wieghted overlap between two time periods; 
Other Use: overlap ranged between 0-19.9% with average of 5.3% 
Reg Stability: frequent changes in size, season and possession limits, but regulatory stability has improved somewhat in recent years; 6 different recreational regions with differing regulations, significant differences between some regions. 
Discards: live discards make up about 90% of recreational catch. Assumed discard mortality is 10%. Estimates are based on angler recall and uncertain and variable, many angler behavior and regulatory factors can influence discards that are poorly understood; 
Allocation: an amendment to revise the commercial/recreational allocations was completed in 2022 and effective in 2023.  An amendment has been intitiated to address sector separation within the recreational sector which may include designating allocations between the for-hire and private recreational sectors.

Fluke C

Control: commercial ACL has been below the commercial ACL in 4 of the last 5 years (an 8% overage in 2018 and underages from 11-24% in other years). 
Interactions: commercial fisheries (mostly trawl) considered catergory II, no AMs triggered, limited interactions with non-target species with low stock abundance;  
OSW 1: Declining overlap during 14-18 and 19-23 time periods and similar wieghted overlap between two time periods. 
OSW 2: Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 4.2% and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 5.88%. 
Other Use: overlap ranged between 0-19.9% with average of 5.3% 
Reg Stability: coastwide regulations for mimimum size, commercial gear requirements, and reporting have all been very stable/little change for over 20 years. Quota allocation system was revised in 2021. State level regulations can be complex and vary annually (e.g., varying seasons, trip limits, permitting, and reporting systems). 
Discards: dead discards as a percentage of commercial catch has been stable or decreased in the last 5 years, averaging 9% of commercial catch. Discard mortality is estimated to be 80% in trawl gear. 
Allocation: an amendment to revise the commercial/receational allocations was completed in 2022 and became effective in 2023. There are no ongoing allocation actions for the commercial fishery. 

Scup R

Control: There have been significant RHL and rec. ACL overages in the past 3 out of the 5 years. Note the 2 out of the 5 years that did not result in overages was in 2020 and 2019 when old MRIP estimates were still used. 
Interactions: No noteworthy interactions with other species, mostly because the recreational fishery uses hook and line gear. 
OSW 1: Declining overlap during 14-18 and 19-23 time periods and declining wieghted overlap between two time periods. 
Reg stability: Federal regulations have changed each year since 2022.  Each state has different regulations (hence the complexity), and there have been changes to those regulations each year since 2022. 
Discards: live discards make up on average about 50% of recreational catch. Assumed discard mortality is 15%. Estimates are based on angler recall and are uncertain and variable, many angler behavior and regulatory factors can influence discards that are poorly understood. 
Allocation: an amendment to revise the commercial/recreational allocations was completed in 2022 and effective in 2023.  An amendment has been intitiated to address sector separation within the recreational sector which may include designating allocations between the for-hire and private recreational sectors.

Scup C

Control: quota underages range from 16-44% per year since 2014. Reliable in-season monitoring and closure authority. 
Interactions: no AMs triggered due to other fisheries, category II fishery.  
OSW 1: Declining overlap during 14-18 and 19-23 time periods and declining wieghted overlap between two time periods. 
OSW 2: Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 5.7% and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 5.58%. 
Reg stability: Minimal changes to federal regulations in recent years (e.g. incidental possession limit). Each state has different regulations, however there have only been minor changes on a state by state basis in recent years. 
Discards: major sources of scup discards in other fisheries are regulated through the GRAs and incidental possession limits, scup discards have been variable and just slightly above average in recent years, record high discards in 2017 contributed to a 4% ABC overage. 
Allocation: an amendment to revise the commercial/receational allocations was completed in 2022 and became effective in 2023. There are no ongoing allocation actions for the commercial fishery. 

BSB R

Control: RHL and rec. ACL overages during 5 of 5 years, 2018-2022. 
Interactions: limited interaction with MMPA species, no AMs triggered and minimal/no restrictions due to other fisheries. 
OSW 1: Slightly declining overlap during 14-18 and 19-23 time periods and similarly small declines in wieghted overlap between two time periods. 
Reg stability: high variability in measures across states and within states in some cases (e.g., different bag limits at different times of year within a single state). 
Discards: 23% of dead catch due to discards during 2018-2022. Recreational ACL overages for 4 of past 5 years (2018-2022), partially due to higher discards than assumed during specifications setting process. Recreational discard mortality estimated to be 15% 
Allocation: Com/rec allocations revised effective 2023. An amendment has been intitiated to consider recreational sector separation, which may include designating allocations between the for-hire and private recreational sectors.

BSB C

Control: 2 ACL overages during 2018-2022. No ACL overages since 2019, likely due to increase in ACL and revisions to method for predicting future discards. 
Interactions: commercial fisheries (trawl and pot) considered catergory II, no AMs triggered due to other fisheries, limited interaction with non-MAFMC species. 
OSW 1: Slightly declining overlap during 14-18 and 19-23 time periods and similarly small declines in wieghted overlap between two time periods. 
OSW 2: Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 6.1% and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 5.27%. 
Reg stability: Complex regulations but minimal change over past several years at federal level. More frequent changes at state level (e.g., possession limits). 
Discards: Discards averaged 26% of dead catch in 2018-2023. Discards contributed to ACL overages in some years, but not since ACLs increased starting in 2020; method to project discards was also revised to address this issue. 100% discard mortality for trawls and 15% for pots/traps and handlines; 
Allocation: Com/rec allocations revised, effective 2023. Revisions to commercial state alloctions revised through ASMFC process, effective 2022. 

mackerel R

Control: No ACL overages last 5 years using apples to apples MRIP data and measures in place should avoid overages generally; 
Interactions: no known interaction issues; 
OSW 1: Similar spatial overlap during 14-18 and 19-23 time periods and declining wieghted spatial overlap between two time periods. 
Reg stability: new 20-fish limit 2023 but consistent across states that catch macks; 
Discards: 9-26% fish caught released 2018-2023. Excess livewell bait released at end of trip. High post-release mortlality with any skin contact even if looks ok at release.  
Allocation: simple deduction for expected rec catch. 

* Allocation only has low or high rankings. Given rationale for allocation ranking here and no further considerations to change allocations, moved to Low in summary tables

mackerel C

Control: No ACL overages last 5 years using apples to apples MRIP data and measures in place should avoid overages generally. 
Interations: Some marine mammal interations, plus RH/S cap; 
OSW 1: Similar spatial overlap during 14-18 and 19-23 time periods and declining wieghted spatial overlap between two time periods. 
OSW 2: OSW 2: Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 2.1% and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 3.97%. 
Reg stability: regs are highly complex and frequently changed, sometimes year to year or within year; 
Discards: Low percentage but hard to manage (RH/S) and high volume fishery so low % discards can add up.  
Allocation: simple deduction for rec catch affects commerical quota. Expected Canadian catch is also deducted and may be variable. 

butterfish

Control: No ACL overages last 5 years and measures in place should avoid overages generally.  
Interations: Some marine mammal interations;  
OSW 1: Decreasing spatial overlaop during the 14-18 and 19-23 time period and stable/similar weighted overlap during two time periods. 
OSW 2: Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 3.7% and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 3.9%. 
Other Use: overlap ranged between 0.5%-23.0% with average of 6.6% 
Reg stability: regs are complex but have been stable for several years; 
Discards: relatviely high % of butterfish historically discarded - fishery is mixed with longfin squid, which can have high butterfish discards (but now capped); 
Allocation: no recent discussions

longfin

Control: No ACLs. No ABC overages last 5 years and measures in place should avoid overages generally.   
Interations: Some marine mammal interations, turtle takes, sturgeon takes, butterfish cap, RH/S catch, generally high bycatch; 
OSW 1: Declining spatial overlap during 14-18 and 19-23 time periods and slight increases in weighted spatial overlap between two time periods. 
OSW 2: Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 4.2% (increasing trend, almost 6% in 2023) and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 3.9%. 
Reg stability: regs are complex but have been stable for several years; 
Discards: high discards of non-targets around 1/3 of total catch discarded; 
Allocation: nothing current

illex

Control: No ACLs, minor ABC overages occasioanlly - measures in place should avoid substantial overages.   
Interations: Some marine mammal interations; 
OSW 1: Only 2 Illex squid caught in WEAs during two time periods considered (14-18 and 19-23). 
OSW 2: Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 1.1% and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 3.65%. 
Other Use: overlap ranged between 0.8%-22.8% with average of 6.6% 
Reg stability: regs are somewhat complex but have not changed much recently -  changes pending (fish hold size baseline being added); 
Discards: low; 
Allocation:  Illex permitting amendment largely disapproved so nothing now?

golden r

Control: Currently there are no catch and landings limits associated with the recreational fishery. Recreational catches appear to be a minor component of total removals and are not included in the stock assessment. The only management measure for the recreational fishery in the FMP is a recreational bag-limit of 8 fish per angler per trip. 
Interactions: The golden tilefish recreational fishery has been prosecuted with hook and line gear. Species of large whales, dolphins, sea turtles, and Atlantic sturgeon have the potential to be affected by the operation of the golden tilefish fishery. However, as with the commercial fishery, the golden tilefish recreational fishery primarily operates in deep continental shelf edge/slope waters (>200 meters) which could reduce the potential for interaction. 
OSW 1: No Golden tilefish caught in WEA during two time periods considered (14-18 and 19-23). 
OSW 2: add. 
Reg Stability: add. 
Discards: are negligible. 
Allocation: there is no recreational allocation. If recreational landings continue to increase may consider a recreational allocation in the future. 

golden c

Control: overall fishery landings below TAL. Since the IFQ system became effective, golden tilefish landings are closely scrutinized. 
Interactions: The golden tilefish commercial fishery is prosecuted primarily with bottom longline gear (Cat III). There are no documented interactions with ESA-listed and MMPA protected species with bottom longline gear in the tilefish fishery, limited interaction with non-MAFMC species (grouper for example). 
OSW 1: No Golden tilefish caught in WEA during two time periods considered (14-18 and 19-23). 
OSW 2: add. 
Reg Stability: add. 
Discards: the bulk of the tilefish landings are taken by the directed bottom longline fishery and tilefish discards in the trawl and longline fishery are negligible. Discards are prohibited (no highgrading) in the IFQ fishery. 
Allocation: No allocation issues. If recreational landings continue to increase may consider a recreational allocation in the future.

blueline R

Control: No overages since 2018, however, recreational catch data are uncertain and there is minimal private recreational data available to truly assess total recreatioanl catch. Currently use a Delphi approach to calculate total recreational catch which assumes private recreatioanl catch is 105% charter catch reported through VTRs. 
Interactions: The blueline tilefish recreational fishery has been prosecuted with hook and line gear. Species of large whales, dolphins, sea turtles, and Atlantic sturgeon have the potential to be affected by the blueline tilefish fishery. However, the blueline tilefish recreational fishery primarily operates in deep continental shelf edge/slope waters (>200 meters) which could reduce the potential for interaction. 
OSW 1: No Blueline tilefish caught in WEA during two time periods considered (14-18 and 19-23).
OSW 2: add. 
Reg Stability: changes were made in 2023 to the recreational blueline tilefish season, however prior to that the only other change made was several years ago to the recreational bag limit to accomodate different types of vessels and USCG inspected vessels. For those states that have blueline regulations they are typically aligned with regulations in federal water. 
Discards:  There is minimal data available, but discards are assumed to be negligible given the nature of the fishery and the number of anglers targeting blueline tilefish. Based on the recommened 2% of total landings to calculate total recreational discards on average only about 200 bluelines are discard each year. Even fewer blueline discards are reported through VTR data. 
Allocation: There has been some recent discussion of allocations, but more data is necessary to make more informed decisions.

blueline C

Control: Commercial overage in 2020 and 2023 
Interactions: The blueline tilefish commercial fishery is prosecuted primarily with bottom longline gear. There are no documented interactions with ESA-listed and MMPA protected species with bottom longline gear in the tilefish fishery, limited interaction with non-MAFMC species (grouper for example). 
OSW 1: No Blueline tilefish caught in WEA during two time periods considered (14-18 and 19-23). 
OSW 2: add. 
Reg Stability: No recent changes outside of change in 2019 to the commercial trip limit to accomodate larger landings to achieve optimum yield. For states that have regulations they are consisten with federal regulations. 
Discards:  Are negligible or low since few vessels conduct directed trips targeting blueline tilefish.  
Allocation: There has been some recent discussion of allocations, but more data is necessary to make more informed decisions.

bluefish R

Control: Overages rarely occured in the past (with the help of transfers). The stock is currently overfished as a result of the most recent operational assessment which includes the recalibrated MRIP estimates in a fishery that is ~90% recreational. 
Interactions: The bluefish recreational fishery has been prosecuted with hook and line gear and rarely interact with ESA-listed and MMPA protected species. 
OSW 1: Moderate decreases in spatial and weighted spatial overlap between 14-18 and 19-23 time periods; 
Other Use: overlap ranged between 0-25.5% with average of 6.6% 
Reg Stability: Federal Regulations have remained status quo after they were adjusted in 2020, however in state waters, measures are variable along the coast. 
Discards:  Discards occur regularly in the bluefish recreational fishery, but are managed. Recreational discard mortality rate is 9.4%  
Allocation: An amendment has been intitiated to address sector separation within the recreational sector which may include designating allocations between the for-hire and private recreational sectors.

allocation remained at 4 due to consideration of rec sector separation, justification was modified

bluefish C

Control: Overages rarely occur (with the help of transfers), but have occurred in the past. 
Interactions: The bluefish commercial fishery has been prosecuted with gillnet gear, but rarely interact with ESA-listed and MMPA protected species in coastal waters. 
OSW 1: Moderate decreases in spatial and weighted spatial overlap between 14-18 and 19-23 time periods. 
OSW 2:  Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 2.7% and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 5.58%. 
Other Use: overlap ranged between 0-25.5% with average of 6.6%; 
Reg Stability: Regulations have recently been adjusted to ensure the decreased commercial quota is not exceeded, as a result of the overfished status. There is no anticipated transfer from the recreational fishery.  
Discards:  Discards occur regularly in the bluefish commercial fishery, but are managed and insignficant (approx. 0.2% of total catch). 
Allocation: An amendment has been completed in 2021 and implemented in 2022 to adjust bluefish allocations and the rebuilding plan.

allocation indicator changed to 1 because comm/rec allocation changes are no longer under consideration and the amendment is complete

dogfish R

Control: No ACL overages last 5 years and measures in place should avoid overages generally; 
Interactions:  no known interation issues; 
OSW 1: Slight increases in spatial and weighted spatial overlap between 14-18 and 19-23 time periods. 
Reg stability: minimal recreational regs; 
Discards: high percent of dogfish caught are discarded but low part of overall mortality. Recreational discard mortality is estimated to be 20%; 
Allocation: no recent discussions

dogfish C

Control: No ACL overages last 5 years and measures in place should avoid overages generally.  
Interations: Some marine mammal interations and sturgeon take maybe turtles too; 
OSW 1: Slight increases in spatial and weighted spatial overlap between 14-18 and 19-23 time periods. 
OSW 2: Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 0.5% and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 3.91%. 
Reg stability: regs are highly complex and frequently changed, sometimes year to year recently.  Sturgeon measures pending. 
Discards: overall low, but some bycatch events; 
Allocation: ASMFC action can transfer reqional quotas and match annual variability.

* Allocation only has low or high rankings. Given rationale for allocation ranking here and no further considerations to change allocations, moved to Low in summary tables

chub mack

Control: Mgmt first implemented in 2020. Limits have never been exceeded. 
Interactions: some marine mammal interactions. 
OSW 1: Only 1 chub mackerel caught in WEA during two time periods considered (14-18 and 19-23). 
OSW 2: Average (19-23) commercial revenue from WEAs was 2.9% (increasing trend, over 7% in 2023) and spatial overlap with survey by WEA phase was 7.01%. 
Reg stability: Simpler regulations than some other species. Management measures first implemented in 2017, revised only once in 2020. 
Discards: The first ABC and ACL were implemented in 2020 and were not exceeded. Discards generally make up 6% or less of total catch. 
Allocation: The stock is not allocated and there are currently no allocation concerns.

unmanaged forage

Control: No stock assessements or ABCs. Only restriction is a possession limit  first implemented in Sept 2017. No indication of trip limits being exceeded. 
Interactions: Forage EC species are not managed with OY and they do not have notable directed fisheries; therefore, although interactions with other fishery regulations are possible, these interactions likely have minimal impacts. 
Reg stability: Only regulations are permit and reporting requirement, possession limit, and transit provisions. First ipmlemented in Septeber 2017 and have remained unchanged. 
Discards: Forage EC species are not managed with ACLs; therefore, discards do not cause closures or trigger AMs. Targeting of these forage speceis is small-scale. 
Allocation: Stocks are not allocated and there are currently no allocation concerns.

deepwater corals

Control and Interactions: Not applicable due to no directed harvest;  
Reg stability and Discards: Not applicable due to no directed harvest. 